A system for categorising and tracking changes in numbers was first introduced in the AESR 2007, resulting in the display of a “Cause of Change” for each area and an Interpretation of Changes table for each country and region as well as the continent. (“Cause of Change” has been renamed “Reason for Change” on this website; see below.) This system is intended to distinguish between real changes in numbers and changes in survey techniques or area of survey coverage, thus limiting inappropriate extrapolations about trends over time.

The Definite, Probable, Possible, and Speculative (DPPS) system, in use since 1995, was designed to describe uncertainty and data quality. However, the calculations underpinning it are complex and its display of population numbers difficult to understand and interpret. Although the AESR 2007 emphasizes that “comparing guesses to derive population trends is a meaningless exercise,” the four-category “DPPS” itself does not explicitly articulate the proportion of elephant numbers that are guesses (i.e. population figures that do not meet the criteria required to qualify as population estimates).

To simplify the presentation of elephant numbers and clearly demonstrate the calculations lead¬ing to the totals at the national, regional, and continental levels, the DPPS has been replaced by the Alternative Data Display (ADD), which classifies numbers either as estimates or guesses, and distinguishes what kinds of surveys have provided the figures. In contrast to the DPPS, the estimates derived from surveys in the AESR 2016 are additive, so that the rows, listed by survey types, total to the country totals and the country level totals add to the regional totals, and so forth. Very small differences in the totals in the tables may occur due to rounding of decimal places. Guesses are not completely additive because they include upper and lower confidence limits from certain types of survey. Columns involving confidence limits (CL) remain the necessary exception, as adding CLs requires the pooling of variances to derive a new CL appropriate for the sum total. Furthermore, population estimates are now aligned with the range area (km²) they cover in the same table. While the printed AESR 2016 only uses the ADD, the DPPS has been retained here in the AED online platform for comparative purposes.